The Project Gutenberg EBook of Declaration of Faith, by 
Saint Athanasius Archbishop of Alexandria

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Declaration of Faith
       In Latin and the Original Greek

Author: Saint Athanasius Archbishop of Alexandria

Release Date: May 27, 2010 [EBook #32549]

Language: Greek

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DECLARATION OF FAITH ***




Produced by Michael Gray, the Diocese of San Jose







Declaration of Faith


In Latin and the original Greek


By Saint Athanasius

Bishop of Alexandria
Doctor of the Church
Who Attended the First Council of Nicaea
And Fought Courageously Against the Arian Heresy



Τοῦ ἐν ἁγίοις Πατρός ἡμῶν
Ἀθανασίου
ἀρχιεπισκόπου Ἀλεξανδρείας
ἔκθεσις πίστεως. [1]

1. Πιστεύομεν εἰς ἕνα ἀγέννητον θεόν, Πατέρα παντοκράτορα, πάντων
ποιητὴν ὁρατῶν τε καὶ ἀοράτων, τὸν ἔχοντα ἀφ’ ἑαυτοῦ τὸ εἶναι· καὶ εἰς
ἕνα μονογενῆ Λόγον, Σοφίαν, Υἱόν, ἐκ τοῦ Πατρὸς ἀνάρχως καὶ ἀϊδίως
γεγεννημένον [2], Λόγον δὲ οὐ προφορικόν, [3] οὐκ ἐνδιάθετον, οὐκ
ἀπόῤῥοιαν τοῦ τελείου, οὐ τμῆσιν τῆς ἀπαθοῦς φύσεως οὔτε προβολήν, ἀλλ’
Υἱὸν αὐτοτελῆ, ζῶντά τε καὶ ἐνεργοῦντα, τὴν ἀληθινὴν εἰκόνα τοῦ Πατρὸς
[4], ἰσότιμον καὶ ἰσόδοξον· τοῦτο γάρ ἐστι, φησί, τὸ θέλημα τοῦ Πατρός,
_Ἵνα καθὼς τιμῶσι τὸν Πατέρα, οὕτω τιμῶσι καὶ τὸν Υἱόν_. Θεὸν ἀληθινὸν
ἐκ Θεοῦ ἀληθινοῦ, ὥς φησιν Ἰωάννης ἐν Καθολικαῖς [5] τό· _Ἐσμὲν ἐν τῷ
ἀληθινῷ_, ἐν τῷ Υἱῷ αὐτοῦ Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ. _Οὗτός_ ἐστιν _ὁ ἀληθινὸς Θεὸς
καὶ ζωὴ αἰώνιος_· παντοκράτορα ἐκ παντοκράτορος· πάντων γάρ, ὧν ἄρχει ὁ
Πατὴρ καὶ κρατεῖ, ἄρχει καὶ κρατεῖ καὶ ὁ Υἱός [6]· ὅλος ἐξ ὅλου, ὅμοιος
τῷ Πατρὶ ὢν, ὥς φησιν ὁ Κύριος· _Ὁ ἐμὲ ἑωρακὼς ἑώρακε τὸν Πατέρα_.
Ἐγεννήθη δὲ ἀνεκφράστως καὶ ἀπερινοήτως· _Τὴν γὰρ γενεὰν αὐτοῦ_ [7]·
_τίς διηγήσεται;_ ἀντὶ τοῦ, οὐδείς· ὃς ἐπὶ συντελείᾳ τῶν αἰώνων κατελθὼν
ἐκ τῶν κόλπων τοῦ Πατρὸς, ἐκ τῆς ἀχράντου Παρθένου Μαρίας τὸν ἡμέτερον
ἀνείληφεν ἄνθρωπον, Χριστὸν Ἰησοῦν, ὃν ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν παθεῖν παρέδωκεν ἰδίᾳ
προαιρέσει, ὥς φησιν ὁ Κύριος· _Οὐδεὶς αἴρει τὴν ψυχήν μου ἀπ’ ἐμοῦ·
ἐξουσίαν ἔχω θεῖναι αὐτὴν καὶ ἐξουσίαν ἔχω πάλιν λαβεῖν αὐτήν_.  Ἐν ᾧ
ἀνθρώπῳ σταυρωθεὶς καὶ ἀποθανὼν ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν, ἀνέστη ἐκ νεκρῶν, καὶ [8]
ἀνελήφθη εἰς οὐρανούς. Ἀρχὴ ὁδῶν κτισθεὶς ἡμῖν, ἐν τῇ γῇ ὢν, ἡμῖν
ἔδειξεν ἐκ σκότους φῶς, σωτηρίαν ἐκ πλάνης, ζωὴν ἐκ νεκρῶν, εἴσοδον ἐν
τῷ παραδείσῳ, ἐξ οὗ ἐκβέβληται [9] Ἀδάμ, εἰς ὃν πάλιν εἰσῆλθε διὰ τοῦ
ληστοῦ, ὡς εἶπεν ὁ Κύριος· _Σήμερον μετ’ ἐμοῦ ἔσῃ ἐν τῷ παραδείσῳ_· εἰς
ὃν καὶ ὁ Παῦλος εἰσῄει· ἄνοδόν τε εἰς οὐρανούς, ὅπου πρόδρομος εἰσῆλθεν
ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν ὁ Κυριακὸς ἄνθρωπος, ἐν ᾧ μέλλει κρίνειν ζῶντας καὶ νεκρούς.

2. Πιστεύομεν ὁμοίως καὶ [10] εἰς τὸ Πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον τὸ πάντα ἐρευνῶν
καὶ τὰ βάθη τοῦ θεοῦ, ἀναθεματίζοντες τὰ παρὰ τοῦτο [11] φρονοῦντα
δόγματα. Οὔτε γὰρ υἱοπάτορα φρονοῦμεν, ὡς οἱ Σαβέλλιοι λέγοντες
μονοούσιον καὶ οὐχ ὁμοούσιον, καὶ ἐν τούτῳ ἀναιροῦντες τὸ εἶναι Υἱόν·
οὔτε τὸ παθητὸν σῶμα, ὃ ἐφόρεσε διὰ τὴν τοῦ παντὸς κόσμου σωτηρίαν,
ἀνατίθεμεν τῷ Πατρί· οὔτε τρεῖς ὑποστάσεις μεμερισμένας καθ’ ἑαυτάς,
ὥσπερ σωματοφυῶς ἐπ’ ἀνθρώπων, ἐστὶ λογίσασθαι, ἵνα μὴ πολυθείαν [12],
ὡς τὰ ἔθνη, φρονήσωμεν· ἀλλ’ ὥσπερ ἐκ πηγῆς ποταμὸς γεγενημένος οὐ
διῃρέτη, καίτοι δύο σχήματα καὶ δύο ὀνόματα τυγχάνοντα. Οὔτε γὰρ ὁ Πατὴρ
Υἱός ἐστιν, οὔτε ὁ Υἱὸς Πατήρ ἐστιν· ὁ γὰρ Πατὴρ, Υἱοῦ Πατήρ ἐστι [13] ·
καὶ ὁ Υἱὸς, Πατρὸς Υἱός ἐστιν. Ὡς γὰρ οὐκ ἔστιν ἡ πηγὴ ποταμὸς, οὐδὲ ὁ
ποταμὸς πηγή, ἀμφότερα δὲ ἓν καὶ ταὐτόν ἐστιν ὕδωρ τὸ ἐκ τῆς πηγῆς εἰς
τὸν ποταμὸν μετοχετευόμενον· οὕτως ἡ ἐκ τοῦ Πατρὸς εἰς τὸν Υἱὸν θεότης
ἀῤῥεύστως καὶ ἀδιαιρέτως τυγχάνει [14]. Φησὶ γὰρ ὁ Κύριος· _Ἐκ τοῦ
Πατρὸς ἐξῆλθον καὶ ἥκω_. Παρὰ δὲ τῷ Πατρί ἐστιν ἀεὶ ὁ ὢν εἰς τὸν κόλπον
τοῦ Πατρός· οὐδέποτε δὲ ἐκενώθη ὁ κόλπος τοῦ Πατρὸς τῆς τοῦ Υἱοῦ
θεότητος, φησὶ γάρ· _Ἐγὼ ἤμην παρ’ αὐτῷ ἁρμόζουσα_. Οὐ φρονοῦμεν δὲ
κτίσμα [15] ἢ ποίημα ἢ ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων τὸν τοῦ παντὸς κτίστην Θεόν τὸν τοῦ
Θεοῦ Υἱόν, τὸν ἐκ τοῦ ὄντος ὄντα, τὸν ἐκ τοῦ μόνου μόνον, ὡς [16]
συναπεγεννήθη ἐκ τοῦ Πατρὸς ἀϊδίως ἡ ὁμοία δόξα καὶ δύναμις· ὁ γὰρ
ἑωρακὼς τὸν Υἱὸν καὶ τὸν Πατέρα ἑώρακε. Τὰ πάντα δηλονότι διὰ τοῦ Υἱοῦ
ἐκτίσθησαν· ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἔστιν αὐτὸς κτίσμα, ὥς φησιν ὁ Παῦλος περὶ τοῦ
Κυρίου· _Ὅτι ἐν αὐτῷ ἐκτίσθη τὰ πάντα καὶ αὐτός ἐστι πρὸ πάντων_. Οὐ
λέγει δὲ ὅτι πρὸ πάντων ἐκτίσθη, ἀλλ’ ὅτι πρὸ πάντων ἐστί· τὸ γοῦν
ἐκτίσθαι ἐπὶ πάντων κεῖται· τὸ δὲ, ἔστι πρὸ πάντων μόνῳ τῷ Υἱῷ ἁρμόττει.

3. Γέννημα τοίνυν κατὰ φύσιν ἐκ τελείου τέλειόν ἐστι, πρὸ πάντων βουνῶν
γεννηθέν, τουτέστι πρὸ πάσης λογικῆς καὶ νοερᾶς οὐσίας, ὡς καὶ ἐν ἑτέρῳ
τόπῳ φησὶν αὐτὸν ὁ Παῦλος [17] _πρωτότοκον πάσης κτίσεως._ Ἀλλὰ
πρωτότοκον εἰπὼν [18], δηλοῖ μὴ εἶναι αὐτὸν κτίσμα, ἀλλὰ γέννημα τοῦ
Πατρός· ξένον γὰρ ἐπὶ τῆς θεότητος αὐτοῦ τὸ λέγεσθαι κτίσμα. Τὰ γὰρ
πάντα ἐκτίσθησαν ὑπὸ τοῦ Πατρὸς διὰ τοῦ Υἱοῦ· ὁ δὲ Υἱὸς μόνος ἐκ τοῦ
Πατρὸς ἀϊδίως ἐγεννήθη· διὸ πρωτότοκός ἐστι πάσης κτίσεως ὁ Θεὸς Λόγος,
ἄτρεπτος ἐξ ἀτρέπτου. Ἔστι τοίνυν τὸ [19] ὃ δι’ ἡμᾶς ἐφόρεσε σῶμα κτίσμα
περὶ οὗ λέγει ὁ Ἰερεμίας κατὰ τὴν τῶν Ἑβδομήκοντα ἑρμηνευτῶν [20]
ἔκδοσιν· _Κύριος ἡμῖν ἔκτισεν εἰς καταφύτευμα σωτηρίαν καινήν, ἐν ᾗ
σωτηρίᾳ περιελεύσονται ἄνθρωποι_. Κατὰ δὲ τὸν Ἀκύλαν, περὶ τοῦ αὐτοῦ
ῥητοῦ κεῖται· _Ἔκτισε Κύριος καινὸν ἐν τῇ θηλείᾳ_. Ἡ δὲ κτισθεῖσα ἡμῖν
εἰς καταφύτευμα σωτηρία [21] καινὴ καὶ οὐ παλαιά, ἡμῖν τε καὶ οὐ πρὸ
ἡμῶν, Ἰησοῦς ἐστιν [22], ὁ κατὰ τὸν Σωτῆρα γενόμενος ἄνθρωπος, ὃς
ἑρμηνεύεται πῇ μὲν σωτηρία, πῇ δὲ Σωτήρ. Ἔστι δὲ ἐκ τοῦ Σωτῆρος ἡ
σωτηρία, ὃν τρόπον ἐκ τοῦ φωτὸς ὁ φωτισμός. Ἡ οὖν ἐκ τοῦ Σωτῆρος σωτηρία
κτισθεῖσα καινὴ, καθὼς λέγει Ἰερεμίας, ἔκτισεν ἡμῖν σωτηρίαν, καὶ ὡς
Ἀκύλας φησὶν, _Ἔκτισε Κύριος καινὸν ἐν τῇ θηλείᾳ_, τουτέστιν ἐν τῇ
Μαρίᾳ. Οὐδὲν γὰρ ἐκτίσθη καινὸν ἐν τῇ θηλείᾳ, εἰ μὴ τὸ ἐκ τῆς παρθένου
Μαρίας τεχθὲν ἄνευ συνουσίας Κυριακὸν σῶμα, ὡς καὶ ἐν Παροιμίαις ἐκ
προσώπου τοῦ Ἰησοῦ [23] λέγει· _Κύριος ἔκτισέ με ἀρχὴν ὁδῶν αὐτοῦ εἰς
ἔργα αὐτοῦ_. Οὐ λέγει δὲ, πρὸ ἔργων ἔκτισέ με, ἵνα μή τις εἰς τὴν
θεότητα τοῦ Λόγου ἐκλάβοι τὸ ῥητόν.

4. Ἑκάτερα τοίνυν τὰ περὶ τὸ κτίσμα ῥητὰ σωματικῶς εἰς τὸν Ἰησοῦν
γέγραπται· ἀρχὴ γὰρ ὁδῶν ἐκτίσθη ὁ Κυριακὸς ἄνθρωπος, ὅν [24] εἰς
σωτηρίαν ἡμῖν ἐφανέρωσε. Διὰ τούτου γὰρ πρὸς τὸν Πατέρα ἔχομεν
προσαγωγήν· αὐτὸς γάρ ἐστιν ἡ ὁδός, ἡ πρὸς τὸν Πατέρα ἀνάγουσα ὑμᾶς
[25]. Ὁδὸς δὲ σωματικόν τί ἐστι θέαμα, ἥτις ἐστὶν ὁ Κυριακὸς ἄνθρωπος.
Τὰ πάντα γοῦν ἔκτισεν ὁ τοῦ Θεοῦ λόγος οὐκ ὢν κτίσμα, ἀλλὰ γέννημα.
Οὐδὲν γὰρ τῶν κτισμάτων ἔκτισέ τι ἴσον ἢ ὅμοιον ἑαυτῷ· Πατρὶ δὲ ἔοικε τὸ
γεννᾷν, τεχνίτῃ δὲ τὸ κτίζειν. Ποίημα γοῦν ἐστι καὶ κτίσμα [26] τὸ ὃ δι’
ἡμᾶς ἐφόρεσε σῶμα ὁ Κύριος, _Ὃ ἐγεννήθη ἡμῖν_, ὥς φησιν ὁ Παῦλος, _ἀπὸ
Θεοῦ σοφία καὶ ἁγιασμὸς καὶ δικαιοσύνη καὶ ἀπολύτρωσις_· καίπερ πρὸ ἡμῶν
καὶ πάσης κτίσεως σοφία τοῦ Πατρὸς ἦν ὁ Λόγος καὶ ἔστι. Τὸ δὲ ἅγιον
Πνεῦμα, ἐκπόρευμα ὂν τοῦ Πατρὸς, ἀεί ἐστιν ἐν ταῖς χερσὶ τοῦ πέμποντος
Πατρὸς καὶ τοῦ φέροντος Υἱοῦ, δι’ οὗ ἐπλήρωσε τὰ πάντα. Ὁ Πατὴρ συνέχων
[28] ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ τὸ εἶναι, ἐγέννησε τὸν Υἱὸν, ὡς ἔφαμεν, καὶ οὐκ ἔκτισεν,
ὡς ποταμὸν ἀπὸ πηγῆς, καὶ ὡς βλαστὸν ἀπὸ ῥίζης, καὶ ὡς ἀπαύγασμα ἀπὸ
φωτός, ἃ οἶδεν ἡ φύσις ἀδιαίρετα· δι’ οὗ τῷ Πατρὶ δόξα, κράτος,
μεγαλοσύνη πρὸ πάντων τῶν αἰώνων [29], καὶ εἰς τοὺς σύμπαντας αἰῶνας τῶν
αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.



S. P. N. ATHANASII
ARCHIEPISCOPI ALEXANDRIÆ
EXPOSITIO FIDEI.

---

1. Credimus in unum non genitum Deum, Patrem omnipotentem, omnium
effectorem visibilium et invisibilium, qui a se ipso habet ut sit: et in
unum unigenitum Verbum, Sapientiam, Filium, ex Patre sine initio et ab
æternitate genitum, Verbum vero non prolatum vel internum [3], non
aliquid ex perfecto effluens, aut ex impatibili natura sectum vel
projectum, sed Filium per se perfectum, viventem et agentem, veram
Patris imaginem, honore et gloria parem: hæc est enim, inquit, voluntas
Patris, _Ut quemadmodum Patrem honorant, ita et Filium honorent_ (1):
Deum verum ex Deo vero; uti dicit Joannes in catholicis Epistolis: _Et
simus in vero,_ in Filio ejus Jesu Christo. _Hic est verus Deus et vita
æterna_ (2): omnipotentem ex omnipotente, omnibus enim, quibus imperat et
dominatur Pater, imperat et dominatur similiter Filius, qui totus ex
toto et similis Patri exsistit, ut ipse ait Dominus: _Qui me videt,
videt Patrem_ (3). Genitus autem est modo inexplicabili et qui
comprehendi nequeat. Nam _generationem ejus quis enarrabit_ (4)? quod
idem est ac si diceretur, nullus. Qui idem cum in fine sæculorum ex
Patris sinu descendisset, ex inviolata Virgine Maria nostrum assumpsit
hominem, Jesum Christum, cujus propriæ voluntati reliquit, ut pro nobis
pateretur, quemadmodum ipse ait Dominus: _Nemo tollit animam meam a me:
potestatem habeo ponendi eam, et potestatem habeo iterum sumendi eam_
(5). In quo homine crucifixtis et mortuus pro nobis, resurrexit a
mortuis, et in cœlos assumptus est. Idem principium viarum nobis creatus
(6), cum in terra versaretur, nobis ex tenebris lumen exhibuit, salutem
ex errore, vitam ex mortuis, nec non ingressum in paradisum, ex quo Adam
ejectus fuerat, et in quem idem rursus per latronem ingressus est,
quomadmodum ait Dominus: _Hodie mecum eris in paradiso_ (7), in quem
etiam introivit ipse Paulus. Ascensum quoque in cœlum nobis paravit, quo
præcursor pro nobis intravit Dominicus homo, in quo vivos et mortuos est
judicaturus.

2. Credimus similiter in Spiritum sanctum, qui omnia scrutatur etiam
profunda Dei (8). Dogmatis autem omnibus quæ his contraria fuerint,
anathema dicimus. Neque enim Filio Patrem agnoscimus, qui unius sit
substantiæ, non vero consubstantialis, ut volunt Sabelliani, qui hoc
pacto Filium penitus tollunt. Neque etiam patibile corpus, quod propter
totius mundi salutem gestavit, attribuimus Patri: neque tres hypostases
per seipsas divisas, ut in hominibus pro natura corporum accidit, fas
est in Deo cogitare, ne, ut gentes, deorum multitudinem inducamus; sed
sicut fluvius, qui ex fonte genitus, ab eodem non separatur, quamvis duæ
sint illorum figuræ duove nomina. Siquidem neque Pater est Filius, neque
Filius est Pater; nam Pater, Filii Pater est, et Filius, Patris est
Filius. Ut enim fons non est fluvius, neque fluvius est fons, sed
uterque una et eadem est aqua, quæ ex fonte permanat in fluvium; sic
divinitas ex Patre in Filium absque fluxione et divisione diffunditur.
Hinc dicit Dominus: _Ex Patre exivi et venio_ (9). Apud Patrem autem
semper is est, qui est in sinu Patris: nec unquam sinus Patris Filii
divinitate est exinanitus, namque ait: _Ego eram apud eum componens_
(10). Nec vero sentimus creatum ut factum, aut ex nihilo esse rerum
omnium creatorem Deum, Dei Filium, ex exsistente exsistentem, ex solo
solum, cui ab æternitate ex Patre par gloria et virtus simul ingenita
est: nam qui videt Filium, videt et Patrem (11). Nempe omnia per Filium
creata sunt: at non ipse res est creata, uti his verbis docet Paulus:
_Quia in ipso creata sunt omnia, et ipse est ante omnia_ (12). Non autem
dicit eum ante omnia creatum esse, sed esse ante omnia. Hoc igitur
verbum, creatum esse, de omnibus quidem dicitur: sed esse ante omnia
soli utique Filio congruit.

3. Ille itaque fetus est natura perfectus ex perfecto, ante omnes colles
genitus, hoc est, ante omnem naturam ratione et intelligentia præditam,
quemadmodum alibi Paulus eum vocat _primogenitum omnis creaturæ_ (13).
Verum cum primogenitum dixit, illum non creatum esse, sed fetum esse
Patris significavit. Siquidem alienum est ab ejus divinitate, rem
creatam ipsum dici. Omnia enim a Patre per Filium creata sunt: solus
autem Filius ab æternitate ex Patre genitus est, unde Deus Verbum
primogenitus est omnis creaturæ, immutabilis ex immutabili. Itaque
corpus quod quidem propter nos assumpsit, res creata est, de quo dicit
Jeremias juxta Septuaginta interpretum editionem: _Dominus creavit nobis
in plantationem salutem novam, in qua salute homines circumibunt_ (14).
Interprete autem Aquila: _Creavit Dominus novum in femina_. Creata porro
nobis in plantationem salus nova et non antiqua, nobis et non ante nos,
Jesus est, qui quatenus Salvator, factus est homo, quæ quidem vox,
_Jesus_, aliquando salus, aliquando Salvator redditur. Est autem ex
Salvatore salus, ut ex lumine illuminatio. Itaque nova ex Salvatore
creata salus, ut loquitur Jeremias, nobis salutem novam creavit, vel, ut
vertit Aquila, _Creavit Dominus novum in femina_, id est in Maria. Nihil
enim novum in femina creatum est, nisi Dominicum corpus, quod Maria
virgo absque concubitu peperit, ut ex persona Jesu in Proverbiis
legitur: _Dominus creavit me initium viarum suarum in opera sua_ (15).
Non dicit, ante opera creavit me, ne quis id ad divinitatem Filii
referret.

4. Utrumque ergo illud de re creata dictum, de Jesu secundum corpus
scriptum est. Siquidem principium viarum creatus est Dominicus homo,
quem nobis nostræ salutis procurandæ causa exhibuit. Nam per ipsum
habemus accessum ad Patrem (16): ipse enim est via quæ nos ad Patrem
ducit. Via autem corporeum quiddam est quod oculis cernitur, estque ipse
Dominicus homo. Omnia ergo creavit Verbum Dei, quod ipsum non creatum
est, sed genitum. Namque nulla res creata aliquid æquale vel simile sibi
ipsi potest creare: sed Patris est generare, et artificis creare. Itaque
res facta et creata est corpus, quod propter nos gestavit Dominus, _Quod
gentium nobis est_, ut ait Paulus, _a Deo sapientia et sanctificatio et
justitia et redemptio_ (17); quamvis ante nos atque rem quamlibet
creatam et fuerit et sit Verbum, Patris sapientia [27]. Sanctus autem
Spiritus qui a Patre procedit, semper est in manibus Patris mittentis,
et ferentis Filii, per quem scilicet omnia replevit. Pater igitur qui ex
seipso esse, ut ita loquar, continet, Filium, uti diximus, genuit, non
creavit, non secus ac fluvium ex fonte, germen ex radice, et splendorem
ex luce, quæ individua esse, natura ipsa agnoscit. Per ipsum autem sit
Patri gloria, potestas et majestas ante omnia sæcula, et in omnia sæcula
sæculorum. Amen.



Apparatus Criticus:

[1] Seguer, Τοῦ αὐτοῦ... ἔκθεσις πίστεως. Regius, Τοῦ αὠτοῦ ἔκθεσις
μεγάλου Ἀθανασίου πίστεως

[2] Seguerianus, γεγενημένον.

[3] Hæc in Eusebianos dicta esse videntur. qui fidei Nicænæ ob vocem
ὁμοούσιον subscribere renuebant. Ἐπεὶ γὰρ, ut scribit Socrates _Histor.
eccles._ lib. I, c. 8, ἔφασαν ὁμοούσιον εἶναι ὃ ἔκ τινός ἐστιν ἢ κατὰ
μερισμὸν ἢ κατὰ ῥεῦσιν ἢ κατὰ προβολήν• κατὰ προβολὴν μὲν ὡς ἐκ ῥιζῶν
βλάστημα, κατὰ δὲ ῥεῦσιν ὡς οἱ πατρικοὶ παῖδες, κατὰ μερισμὸν δὲ ὡς βώλου
χρυσίδες δύο ἢ τρεῖς• οὐδὲν δὲ τούτων ἔστιν ὁ Υἱός, διὰ τοῦτο οὐ
συγκατατίθεσθαι τῇ πίστει ἔλεγον. Id est, _Nam quoniam consubstantiate
illud esse aiebant quod ex alio est vel partitione, vel fluxu, vel
projectu: projectu quidem ut ex radicibus germina: fluxu ut ex
parentibus liberi: partitione vero ut ex auri massa duæ vel tres phialæ:
nullo porro horum modo Filium Dei esse, idcirco in eam fidem se
consentire non posse asseverabant_. Notandum tamen auctores mediæ et infimæ ætatis voce προβολή uti ad significandam processionem Spiritus
sancti; ipsumque Joannem Damascenum, Patrem appellare προβολέα τοῦ ἁγίου
Πνεύματος, ut videre est lib. I _Orthod. fid._., c. 9 et 13.

[4] Gobler. et Felckm. 1 anon., post εἰκόνα τοῦ Πατρὸς,  omissis
interjectis, statim subdunt, ἵνα καθὼς τιμῶσι τὸν Πατέρα, etc. Ibid. Reg.
post καθὼς addit φησί

[5] Gobler. et Felckm. 1 anon., ἐν τῇ Καθολικῇ. Mox Reg., ἐν τῷ ἀληθινῷ
αὐτοῦ Υἱῷ Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ ut et habent aliqui mss. Novi Testamenti edit.
Oxon. 1675, qui tamen Υἱῷ ante αὐτοῦ præmittunt. Paulo post art. ή post
ζωή deest in Seguer.

[6] Sic Reg. Gobler. et Felckm. 1 anon qui tamen duo ultimi, καὶ ὁ Υἱός,
inter ἄρχει et καὶ κρατεῖ interponunt. Alii mss. et editio Commel. καὶ ὁ
Υἱός omittunt.

[7] Sic Seguer. et versio Græca Isaiæ. Editi, αὐτῷ. Quae mox sequuntur,
refert Facundus Hermianensis lib. XI _Pro defensione trium capitulor_.,
cap. 2, his verbis: _Dicit itaque idem beatus Athanasius in expositionem
Symboli: Qui in fine sæculorum descendens ex sinu Patris, ex immaculata
Virgine Maria nostrum assumpsit hominem Jesum Christum, quem pro nobis
passioni tradidit._

[8] Sic Regius ms. In aliis vero et editis _ καὶ deest. Quæ sequuntur,
habet Facundus eodem loco his verbis: _Principium viarum conditibus nobis
est in terra, quas_ (forte _in qua_) _nobis ostendit de tenebris lumen,
salutem ex errore, vitam ex mortuis, introitum ad paradisum, de quo
exclusus est Adam, in quem iterum intravit per latronem, sicut dixit
Dominus:_ Hodie mecum eris in paradiso (_Luc._ XXIII, 43), _quo et Paulus
intravit, ascensum in cœlum quo præcursor pro nobis ingressus est
Dominicus homo, in quo judicaturus est vivos et mortuos._

[9] Seguer. ἐκβέβλητο. Mox Gobler. et Felckm. 1 anon ὡς ἔφη ὁ Κύριος.

[10] Καὶ abest a Seguer. Gobler. et Felckm. 1 anon.

[11] Gobler. et Felckman., ταῦτα. Mox Reg. et Seguer. Υἱοπάτορα habent:
alii vero et editi, Υἱοπατέρα.

[12] Seguer. πολυθείαν. Id. Mox, γεγενημένος.

[13] Ἐστί hic et mox abest a Gobleriane et Felckmanni 1 anonymo

[14] Reg., τυχόν, mendose.

[15] In mss. Reg. et Seguer. particula καί, quam hic alii et editi
addunt, nulla est.

[16] Sic mss. Seguer. et Reg. quos ipsi vidimus, atque etiam editi.
Nullam quoque hic mss. discrepantiam affert Felckmannus. Nannius sic
hunc locum reddit: _cui ut ab æterno ex Patre genito par gloria et
potestas_. An forte ᾧ pro ὡς legerit? Nos ita vertimus quasi ᾧ legendum
esset: nam ex particula ὡς nullus rectus sensus, ut nobis quidem videtur,
elici potest. Nostram autem conjecturam non parum confirmant quæ
subjiciuntur verba, Ὁ γὰρ ἑωρακὼς τὸν Υἱὸν, etc. _Nam qui videt Filium,
videt et Patrem_. Inde enim clarum est hic significari, Filio ex Patre
similem adeo gloriam et virtutem esse ab æternitate genitam, ut qui
viderit Filium, viderit simul et Patrem.

[17] Αὐτὸν ὁ Παῦλος abest a Gobler. et Felckm. 1 anon.

[18] Seguer. omittit εἰπών. Gobler. et Felckm. 1 anon., omisso εἰπών,
δηλῶν habent. In Reg. pro δηλοῖ, δηλῶν legitur.

[19] Sic Regius, Seguer. Gobler. et Felckm. 1 anon. At alii cum editis
τό omittunt: editique præteria δι’ ἡμᾶς post ἐφόρεσε habent.

[20] Ἑρμηνευτῶν deest in Gobler. et Felckm. 1 anon. Hic porro locus sic
in Hebræo legitur:

: גבד חםובב בקבה באדץ חדשה יהוה בדא

id est, _Creavit Deus novum in terra, femina circumdabit virum_.

[21] Sic Seguer. Cæteri vero et editi, σωτηρίας καινή, mendose.

[22] ישןצה, unde nomen Jesus a verbo, ישצ, proprie quidem est salus: at
nomen proprium inde deductum recte _Salvator_ vertitur. Hinc Hieronymus
lib. 1 _Commentarior. In Matth.: Jesus Hebræo sermone Salvator dicitur_.
Hunc locum Facundus Hermian. loco supra laudato his verbis refert: _Ea
vero salus, quæ nobis condita est ad plantationem nostram, nova est et
non vetus, nobis et non eis, qui ante nos. Jesus qui juxta Salvatorem
factus est homo, qui interpretatur pastor, salus, interdum etiam
Salvator._ Hæc ibi perperam e Græco reddita.

[23] Goblerianus et Felckm. primus anonymous τοῦ Υἱοῦ.

[24] Basiliensis ms. ὧν

[25] Sic Seguer. Gobler. et Felckm. 1 anon. Cæteri vero et edit post
ὁδὸς addunt καθὼς λέγει, Ἐγώ εἰμι ἡ ὁδὸς, et præterea Reg. ante καθὼς
habet καὶ ἡ ἀλήθεια. Ibid. Seguer. ἡμᾶς habet: cæteri et editi ὑμᾶς, nec
observant Felckmannus an ἡμᾶς legatur in Gobler. et 1, ut vocat, anonymo,
quemadmodum utique legi debet.

[26] Regius, οὖν, omisso καί sequente. Idem Seguerianus, Goblerianus, et
Felckmann 1 anonymus, habent τὸ ὃ δι’ ἡμᾶς. Cæteri et editi τὸ omittunt.
Mox hæc verba, ὁ Κύριος, ὃ ἐγεννήθη ἡμῖν, desunt in Regio ms. Ibidem
Basiliensis habet ἐγενήθη.

[27] Similia habentur in epistola de sententia Dionysii.

[28] Reg. ὁ συνέχων. Editio Commel. et 6 mss. Felckm. mendose habent,
συνέχον. Mox Seguer., ὡς ἔφημεν.

[29] Gobl. et Felckm. 1 anonym., κράτος εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας. Ἀμήν. In fine
τῶν αἰώνων deest in Regio ms.



Citati de Sacra Biblia

(1) Joan. V, 23.
(2) I Joan. V, 20.
(3) Joan. XIV, 9.
(4) Isa. LIII, 8.
(5) Joan. X, 18.
(6) Prov. VIII, 22.
(7) Luc. XXIII, 43.
(8) I Cor. II, 10.
(9) Joan. XVI, 28.
(10) Prov. VIII, 30.
(11) Joan. XIV, 9.
(12) Coloss. I, 16.
(13) Coloss. I, 15.
(14) Jerem. XXXI, 22.
(15) Prov. VIII, 22.
(16) Ephes. II, 18.
(17) I Cor. I, 30.
(18) Matth. XI, 27.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Declaration of Faith, by 
Saint Athanasius Archbishop of Alexandria

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DECLARATION OF FAITH ***

***** This file should be named 32549-0.txt or 32549-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/5/4/32549/

Produced by Michael Gray, the Diocese of San Jose

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
